update energy consumption page (#8376)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/energy-consumption/index.md

lang: en
---

> ## Ethereum's energy expenditure {#proof-of-stake-energy}

Reviewer: This is one of the pages where do want to use an h1 (`#`) to start, since this template does not automatically render the `title` front matter property as an h1.
```suggestion
# Ethereum's energy expenditure {#proof-of-stake-energy}
```

@minimalsm We may want to consider addressing this separately so our markdown pages always consistently render an h1 from the title property.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, we discussed this before but didn't take action. The problem is we have inconsistencies between the title frontmatter and the explicit H1 we're using, so we should probably make those consistent first.

Reviewer 2: @jmcook1186 any reason why we prefer expenditure over consumption here? no hard stance, just curious.

Author: no, either is fine by me

| :------------------ | :---------------------------------: | :------------------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Gold mining         |                 240                 |          92,000x           | [source](https://www.kitco.com/news/2021-05-17/Gold-s-energy-consumption-doubles-that-of-bitcoin-Galaxy-Digital.html)                             |
| Gold mining         |                 130                 |          50,000x           | [source](https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons)                                                                                                 |
| Bitcoin             |                 130                 |          50,000x           | [source](https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption)                                                                                     |
| Bitcoin             |                 100                 |          38,000x           | [source](https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons)                                                                                                 |

> | Youtube             |                 244                 |          94,000 x          | [source](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/)                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| YouTube             |                 244                 |          94,000 x          | [source](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/)                                                                        |
```

| Global data centers |                 200                 |          78,000x           | [source](https://www.iea.org/commentaries/data-centres-and-energy-from-global-headlines-to-local-headaches)                                       |
| Netflix             |                0.45                 |            175x            | [source](https://s22.q4cdn.com/959853165/files/doc_downloads/2020/02/0220_Netflix_EnvironmentalSocialGovernanceReport_FINAL.pdf)                  |
| Netflix             |                 94                  |          36,000x           | [source](https://theshiftproject.org/en/article/unsustainable-use-online-video/)                                                                  |

> | Paypal              |                0.26                 |            100x            | [source](https://app.impaakt.com/analyses/paypal-consumed-264100-mwh-of-energy-in-2020-24-from-non-renewable-sources-27261)                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| PayPal              |                0.26                 |            100x            | [source](https://app.impaakt.com/analyses/paypal-consumed-264100-mwh-of-energy-in-2020-24-from-non-renewable-sources-27261)                       |
```

| Gaming in USA       |                 34                  |          13,000x           | [source](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336909520_Toward_Greener_Gaming_Estimating_National_Energy_Use_and_Energy_Efficiency_Potential) |
| PoW Ethereum        |                 78                  |          30,000x           | [source](https://digiconomist.net/ethereum-energy-consumption)                                                                                    |

> | PoS Ethereum        |               0.0026                |             1x             | [source](https://carbon-ratings.com/eth-report-2022)                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: > 1x

Should we just omit this for PoS Ethereum (i.e. dash it out)?

Reviewer: I think it works as is... makes it clear this is the factor being compared against

Author: I like it too - it makes it clear what the metric means in the other rows

> Estimates of YouTube's energy expenditure have also been broken down by channel and individual videos. [Those estimates](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/) imply that people consumed >175 times more energy watching Gangnam Style in 2019 alone than the entire Ethereum network uses per year.

Reviewer 2: > imply

Should we use stronger language here? i.e. imply > show ? I can see the argument against this, but if we're using these sources IMO we should trust them enough to make more clear-cut statements.

e.g:

```suggestion
Estimates of YouTube's energy expenditure have also been broken down by channel and individual videos. [Those estimates](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/) show YouTube used over 175 times more energy watching Gangnam Style in 2019 than Ethereum uses per year.
```

Reviewer: or "demonstrate"

But either way, good with whichever we decide here

> It is often very difficult to obtain accurate estimates for energy consumption, especially when an entity has a complex supply chain or deployment details that influence their efficiency. For example, we have included an upper and lower estimate for gold mining that differ by about 90 TWh. Estimates of energy consumption by Netflix range dramatically depending on the source. Their own self-reported estimates are about 20x smaller than an independent estimate - there is some discussion about the reasons for this on [Carbon Brief](https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-what-is-the-carbon-footprint-of-streaming-video-on-netflix). Similarly, Youtube has been estimated to expend about [244 TWh/yr](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/), although the energy consumption depends a lot on the type of device videos are streamed on and the energy-efficiency of underlying infrastructure such as data centers - suitable values for these parameters are hard to estimate so there is substantial uncertainty.

Reviewer 2: Tried to simplify the first sentence only.

```suggestion
It is complicated to get accurate estimates for energy consumption, especially when what is being measured has a complex supply chain or deployment details that influences its efficiency. For example, we have included an upper and lower estimate for gold mining that differ by about 90 TWh. Estimates of energy consumption by Netflix range dramatically depending on the source. Their own self-reported estimates are about 20x smaller than an independent estimate - there is some discussion about the reasons for this on [Carbon Brief](https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-what-is-the-carbon-footprint-of-streaming-video-on-netflix). Similarly, YouTube has been estimated to expend about [244 TWh/yr](https://thefactsource.com/how-much-electricity-does-youtube-use/), although the energy consumption depends a lot on the type of device videos are streamed on, and the energy-efficiency of underlying infrastructure such as data centers - suitable values for these parameters are hard to estimate so there is substantial uncertainty.
```

> The chart above also includes comparisons to Bitcoin and to "PoW Ethereum". Estimates for Bitcoin's energy consumption vary widely between sources and it is a topic that attracts a lot of nuanced [debate](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2020/05/19/the-last-word-on-bitcoins-energy-consumption/) about not only the amount of energy consumed but the sources of that energy and the related ethics.

Reviewer: Just thinking, do we need to differentiate "Ethereum when it was under PoW" and "EthereumPoW (ETHW)"? I'm fine with not, just noting

Reviewer 2: Oh is that still a thing @wackerow 😆?

Author: ```suggestion
The chart above also includes comparisons to Bitcoin and to Ethereum when it used proof-of-work.  Estimates for Bitcoin's energy consumption vary widely between sources and it is a topic that attracts a lot of nuanced [debate](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2020/05/19/the-last-word-on-bitcoins-energy-consumption/) about not only the amount of energy consumed but the sources of that energy and the related ethics.
```

Many articles estimate "per-transaction" energy expenditure for blockchains. This can be misleading because the energy required to propose and validate a block is independent of the number of transactions within it. A per transaction unit of energy expenditure implies that fewer transactions would lead to smaller energy expenditure and vice-versa, which is not the case. Also, per-transaction estimates are very sensitive to how a blockchain's transaction throughput is defined, and tweaking this definition can be gamed to make the value seem larger or smaller.

> For example, on Ethereum, the transaction throughput is not only that of the base layer - it is also the sum of the transaction throughput of all of its "[layer 2](/layer-2/)" rollups, which are not generally included in calculations and would drastically reduce them. This is one reason why comparisons of energy consumption per transaction across platforms can be misleading.

Reviewer: As far as I know, Ethereum layer 2 networks are not included in the energy consumption stats for Ethereum, correct? It may be unfair to say we can include all of the layer 2 transactions to inflate the divisor in the "per transaction energy cost" equation, but not include the actual computation and energy use of those networks in the numerator. 
Do we happen to have any information on these networks regarding how much energy they may be consuming? Perhaps it's negligible, but just wanted to make sure this was considered.

Reviewer 2: I'd guess it's very little, given how centralized they currently are.

Author: that's a good point that I hadn't considered - thanks. I also think the sequencer energy consumption is probably small, but might not always be?
```suggestion
For example, on Ethereum, the transaction throughput is not only that of the base layer - it is also the sum of the transaction throughput of all of its "[layer 2](/layer-2/)" rollups. Layer 2's are not generally included in calculations, but accounting for the additional energy consumed by sequencers (small) and the number of transactions they process (large) would likely drastically reduce per-transaction estimates. This is one reason why comparisons of energy consumption per transaction across platforms can be misleading.
```

## Ethereum's carbon debt {#carbon-debt}

Ethereum's energy expenditure is very low, but this has not always been the case. Ethereum originally used proof-of-work which had a much greater environmental cost than the current proof-of-stake mechanism.

> From the very beginning, Ethereum aimed to implement a proof-of-stake based consensus mechanism, but doing so without sacrificing security and decentralization took years of focused research and development. Therefore, a proof-of-work mechanism was used to get the network started. Proof-of-work requires miners to use their computing hardware to calculate a value, expending energy in the process. Ethereum's total energy consumption peaked during the apex of the crypto bull market in February 2022 at just under 94 TWh/yr. Just before the switch to proof-of-stake, the energy consumption was closer to [78 TWh/yr](https://digiconomist.net/ethereum-energy-consumption), comparable to that of Uzbekistan, with a carbon emission equivalent to that of Azerbaijan (33 MT/yr). The switch to proof-of-stake solved this problem.

Reviewer: > The switch to proof-of-stake solved this problem.

Partially. It halts further progression of the problem, but does not undo the impact from the first seven years. Should we address this?

Reviewer: Perhaps we tie the above reality to the ReFi stuff below, where actions are being taken beyond just the switch to PoS to further mitigate the environmental impact that has already been sustained.

Author: ```suggestion
From the very beginning, Ethereum aimed to implement a proof-of-stake based consensus mechanism, but doing so without sacrificing security and decentralization took years of focused research and development. Therefore, a proof-of-work mechanism was used to get the network started. Proof-of-work requires miners to use their computing hardware to calculate a value, expending energy in the process. Ethereum's total energy consumption peaked during the apex of the crypto bull market in February 2022 at just under 94 TWh/yr. Just before the switch to proof-of-stake, the energy consumption was closer to [78 TWh/yr](https://digiconomist.net/ethereum-energy-consumption), comparable to that of Uzbekistan, with a carbon emission equivalent to that of Azerbaijan (33 MT/yr).
```

![Energy consumption comparison of pre- and post-Merge Ethereum. Displayed is on the left the Eiffel tower with 330 meters height and on the right a plastic toy figure with 4 cm height within a magnifying glass.](energy_consumption_pre_post_merge.png)

> [CCRI](https://carbon-ratings.com) examined the impact of Ethereum’s merge from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. The annualized electricity consumption was reduced by more than **99.988 %**. Likewise, Ethereum’s carbon footprint was decreased by approximately **99.992 %** (from 11,016,000 to 870 tonnes CO2e). Depicted metaphorically, this corresponds to a reduction in emissions from the height of the Eiffel Tower to a small plastic toy figure, as shown in the figure above. Therefore, the environmental cost of securing the network is drastically reduced. Simultaneously, the security of the network is thought to have increased.

Reviewer 2: > CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s merge from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake.

Weird phrasing. Some alternatives:

1. CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s transition from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. 
2. CCRI examined the impact of The Merge (Ethereum's transition from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake.)
3. CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s Merge transition from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake.

> [CCRI](https://carbon-ratings.com) examined the impact of Ethereum’s merge from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. The annualized electricity consumption was reduced by more than **99.988 %**. Likewise, Ethereum’s carbon footprint was decreased by approximately **99.992 %** (from 11,016,000 to 870 tonnes CO2e). Depicted metaphorically, this corresponds to a reduction in emissions from the height of the Eiffel Tower to a small plastic toy figure, as shown in the figure above. Therefore, the environmental cost of securing the network is drastically reduced. Simultaneously, the security of the network is thought to have increased.

Reviewer 2: We are already linking to this resource earlier in the article. No need to link the second time.

```suggestion
CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s merge from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. The annualized electricity consumption was reduced by more than **99.988 %**. Likewise, Ethereum’s carbon footprint was decreased by approximately **99.992 %** (from 11,016,000 to 870 tonnes CO2e). Depicted metaphorically, this corresponds to a reduction in emissions from the height of the Eiffel Tower to a small plastic toy figure, as shown in the figure above. Therefore, the environmental cost of securing the network is drastically reduced. Simultaneously, the security of the network is thought to have increased.
```

Reviewer: Would vote (1) above

## A green application layer {#green-applications}

> While Ethereum's energy consumption is very low, there is also a substantial, growing, and highly active **regenerative finance (ReFi)** community building on Ethereum. ReFi applications use DeFi components to build financial applications that have positive externalities benefiting the environment. ReFi is part of a wider ["solarpunk"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solarpunk) movement that is closely aligned with Ethereum and aims to couple technological advancement and environmental stewardship. The decentralized, permissionless, composable nature of Ethereum makes it the ideal base layer for the ReFi and solarpunk communities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Ethereum's energy consumption is very low, there is also a substantial, growing, and highly active **regenerative finance (ReFi)** community building on Ethereum. ReFi applications use DeFi components to build financial applications that have positive externalities benefiting the environment. ReFi is part of a wider ["solarpunk"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solarpunk) movement that is closely aligned with Ethereum and aims to couple technological advancement and environmental stewardship. The decentralized, permissionless, and composable nature of Ethereum makes it the ideal base layer for the ReFi and solarpunk communities.
```

> Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as [Gitcoin](gitcoin.co) run climate rounds specifically in order to stimulate environmentally conscious building on Ethereum's application layer. Through the development of these initiatives (and others, e.g. [DeSci](/desci/)), Ethereum is becoming an environmentally and socially net-positive technology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co) run climate rounds specifically in order to stimulate environmentally conscious building on Ethereum's application layer. Through the development of these initiatives (and others, e.g. [DeSci](/desci/)), Ethereum is becoming an environmentally and socially net-positive technology.
```

> Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co) run climate rounds specifically in order to stimulate environmentally conscious building on Ethereum's application layer. Through the development of these initiatives (and others, e.g. [DeSci](/desci/)), Ethereum is becoming an environmentally and socially net-positive technology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co) run climate rounds to stimulate environmentally conscious building on Ethereum's application layer. Through the development of these initiatives (and others, e.g. [DeSci](/desci/)), Ethereum is becoming an environmentally and socially net-positive technology.
```

Reviewer 2: > Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as Gitcoin run climate rounds

Do others run climate rounds?

Reviewer: Not sure... should we reference KlimaDAO perhaps? Any clr.fund rounds that have focused on climate change?

Author: not yet afaik. I hesitated to link to specific project s(e.g. klimadao)- gitcoin is large enough, unique enough and funds a sufficiently diverse set of projects to be a noncontroversial inclusion IMO

<InfoBanner emoji=":evergreen_tree:">

>   If you think this page can be made more accurate, please raise an issue or PR. The stats on this page are estimates based on publicly available data - they do not represent an official statement or promise from the Ethereum Foundation. 

Reviewer: Perhaps to help continue to make users aware of distinction between entities
```suggestion
  If you think this page can be made more accurate, please raise an issue or PR. The stats on this page are estimates based on publicly available data - they do not represent an official statement or promise from the ethereum.org team, or the Ethereum Foundation. 
```

</InfoBanner>

## Further reading {#further-reading}

- [White House report on PoW blockchains](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf)

> - [A country's worth of power, no more](https://blog.ethereum.org/2021/05/18/country-power-no-more/) – _Carl Beekhuizen, May 18 2021_

Reviewer 2: Should we remove this?

Reviewer 2: Sorry @wackerow, this comment was regarding Carl's article. Not a strong take, but it doesn't really seem as relevant anymore (if we're trying to communicate how Ethereum consumes energy today versus how it did in the past)

Author: yea it is a very old blog post, included because it was the first estimate I'm aware of, and most other articles have built on it in some way. But, it can be removed, probably better tbh.
```suggestion
```

lang: en
---

# Ethereum's energy expenditure {#proof-of-stake-energy}

> Ethereum is a green blockchain. It uses a [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos) consensus mechanism that uses ETH rather than [energy](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow) to secure the network. Ethereum's proof-of-stake mechanism uses just [~0.0026 TWh/yr](https://carbon-ratings.com/eth-report-2022) across the entire global network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ethereum is a green blockchain. It uses a [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos) consensus mechanism, using ETH instead of [energy to secure the network](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow). Ethereum's proof-of-stake mechanism only uses [~0.0026 TWh/yr](https://carbon-ratings.com/eth-report-2022) across the entire global network.
```

> [CCRI](https://carbon-ratings.com) (Crypto Carbon Ratings Institute) generated bottom-up estimates of the electricity consumption and the carbon footprint of the Ethereum network (see [the report](https://carbon-ratings.com/eth-report-2022)). They measured the electricity consumption of different nodes with various hardware and client software configurations. This yielded an estimate of **2.601 MWh** (0.0026 TWh) for the network’s annual electricity consumption (September 2022), which corresponds to yearly carbon emissions of **870 tonnes CO2e** applying regional specific carbon intensity factors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[CCRI (Crypto Carbon Ratings Institute)](https://carbon-ratings.com) generated bottom-up estimates of the electricity consumption and the carbon footprint of the Ethereum network ([see the report](https://carbon-ratings.com/eth-report-2022)). They measured the electricity consumption of different nodes with various hardware and client software configurations. This yielded an estimate of **2.601 MWh** (0.0026 TWh) for the network’s annual electricity consumption (September 2022), which corresponds to yearly carbon emissions of **870 tonnes CO2e** applying regional-specific carbon intensity factors.
```

<EnergyConsumptionChart />

> The figure above shows the estimated annual energy consumption in TWh/yr for various industries (retrieved in June 2022). Note that the estimates presented in the plot are from publicly available sources that have been linked to in the text below. CEBCI refers to the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption index. The values are illustrative and do not represent an official estimate, promise or forecast.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The chart above shows the estimated annual energy consumption in TWh/yr for various industries (retrieved in June 2022). Note that the estimates presented in the plot are from publicly available sources that have been linked to in the table below. CEBCI refers to the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption index. The values are illustrative and do not represent an official estimate, promise, or forecast.
```

From the very beginning, Ethereum planned to implement a proof-of-stake based consensus mechanism, but doing so without sacrificing security and decentralization took years of focused research and development. Therefore, a proof-of-work mechanism was used to get the network started. Proof-of-work requires miners to use their computing hardware to calculate a value, expending energy in the process. Ethereum's total energy consumption peaked during the apex of the crypto bull market in February 2022 at just under 94 TWh/yr. Just before the switch to proof-of-stake, the energy consumption was closer to [78 TWh/yr](https://digiconomist.net/ethereum-energy-consumption), comparable to that of Uzbekistan, with a carbon emission equivalent to that of Azerbaijan (33 MT/yr).

![Energy consumption comparison of pre- and post-Merge Ethereum. Displayed is on the left the Eiffel tower with 330 meters height and on the right a plastic toy figure with 4 cm height within a magnifying glass.](energy_consumption_pre_post_merge.png)

> CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s merge from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. The annualized electricity consumption was reduced by more than **99.988 %**. Likewise, Ethereum’s carbon footprint was decreased by approximately **99.992 %** (from 11,016,000 to 870 tonnes CO2e). Depicted metaphorically, this corresponds to a reduction in emissions from the height of the Eiffel Tower to a small plastic toy figure, as shown in the figure above. Therefore, the environmental cost of securing the network is drastically reduced. Simultaneously, the security of the network is thought to have increased.

Author: ```suggestion
CCRI examined the impact of Ethereum’s transition from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. The annualized electricity consumption was reduced by more than **99.988 %**. Likewise, Ethereum’s carbon footprint was decreased by approximately **99.992 %** (from 11,016,000 to 870 tonnes CO2e). Depicted metaphorically, this corresponds to a reduction in emissions from the height of the Eiffel Tower to a small plastic toy figure, as shown in the figure above. Therefore, the environmental cost of securing the network is drastically reduced. Simultaneously, the security of the network is thought to have increased.
```

Reviewer 2: Oops. Already merged. I've added the change here: https://github.com/ethereum/ethereum-org-website/pull/8472

Web3 native public goods funding platforms such as [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co) run climate rounds specifically in order to stimulate environmentally conscious building on Ethereum's application layer. Through the development of these initiatives (and others, e.g. [DeSci](/desci/)), Ethereum is becoming an environmentally and socially net-positive technology.

<InfoBanner emoji=":evergreen_tree:">
  If you think this page can be made more accurate, please raise an issue or PR. The stats on this page are estimates based on publicly available data - they do not represent an official statement or promise from the ethereum.org team, or the Ethereum Foundation. 
</InfoBanner>

## Further reading {#further-reading}

> - [White House report on PoW blockchains](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [White House report on proof-of-work blockchains](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf)
```
